you have friends over for dinner
you set your drink on the counter and go
help your friend set out some desserts
when you get back you notice the liquid
in your cup
it's sloshing around and the ice cubes
look like ships on a rough sea
now you feel it too on the ceiling the
chandelier is swinging like mad
then you hear someone scream earthquake
the house and everything in it is
rocking back and forth
you try to run for cover but the shaking
keeps you stuck in place
fighting to keep your balance the
cabinets look possessed
and glasses and dishes fly out and smash
on the floor
the bookshelves topple over and
everything hanging on the walls
sways and falls off you duck under the
dining room table
trying not to get hurt on all those
broken dishes yeah you've been through
earthquakes before
but none like this checking your phone
typical no signal you can't believe
what's about to happen
the screams get louder and suddenly the
whole house collapses
the biggest earthquake ever recorded
happened in chile in 1960
disaster came in the afternoon just when
everyone was out enjoying themselves
to cause serious life-changing damage
you need to have a magnitude of around
seven or so on the richter scale this
one
was 9.5 this part of chile is smack dab
on the so-called ring of fire
the most active volcanic and seismic
area in the world
along the pacific rim the initial
shaking lasted around 10 minutes
and after two days many after shots were
still strong enough
to set off a volcano in the south of the
country but that's not where it ended
the earthquake unleashed a series of
tidal waves all over the pacific ocean
with some reaching over 80 feet high the
waves and earthquake were so strong
that they even affected hawaii japan and
the philippines
it caused around a half a billion
nineteen sixty dollars worth of damage
many were left homeless much of their
infrastructure was smashed too
buildings as far as the eye could see
were toppled and debris
piled everywhere scientists estimate
that this earthquake was so powerful
it shifted the earth's axis making our
days 1.26 microseconds shorter
that might not seem like a lot but think
about it
just one natural disaster was strong
enough to make time move
many of the coastal cities were
flattened and floods were widespread
the economy spiraled downward according
to studies
if this earthquake happened today it
caused more than 20 billion dollars in
damages
so what would happen if an earthquake
twice that size
hit without warning for starters you'd
likely feel the effects even further
away
tidal waves wouldn't just hit the coast
of japan in the philippines
they would move even further to china
korea vietnam
and even australia and those waves would
be significantly higher than 80 feet
perhaps double that that's like eight
giraffes piled on top of each other
surfing your way if you live by the
coast you'd notice the waves
if you saw the water recede way back so
you could practically
see where all the fish call home you'd
know it was time to run
chances are that a tsunami is heading
your way
say it really happens you're caught
under the wreckage not knowing what's
going on
you manage to free yourself and escape
to the fresh air
and you're not alone because all the
houses in the neighborhood
have turned into piles of bricks and
rubble the bridges have also collapsed
leaving people stranded on either side
you look around
dust yourself off and rush to find help
fire trucks and ambulances drive between
the broken down
cars and rubble you try to make it to
your car
but the aftershocks are still hitting
and you're getting tossed to the
sidewalk
with all the cell towers down you can't
call anyone on your phone
your knees are shaking but you manage to
power through
once you reach your car you see it
crushed under a boulder
like a giant soda can you continue on
foot and eventually reach downtown
it looks as if some giant got angry and
knocked all the buildings down
you push forward and try to see if you
can find some help
without warning your phone vibrates you
check it and see a thousand
notifications
about a 20 magnitude earthquake you're
still shaking
but that's all you the ground is still
for now
uh oh you hear something in the distance
racing towards you to your right you see
tidal waves as tall as buildings
charging at you still in shock not
knowing what to do
you now come to your senses and run you
don't even know which way to go
there's a tsunami right behind you and
in front of you are broken down
buildings
with rocks and concrete still falling
everywhere
wait there's a building that's somehow
still standing
you need to get on top of that thing you
reach the elevator but it's jammed
not surprising you bolt up the stairs as
fast as you can
tripping on broken glass and plaster but
always managing to get back up
you look out a window and see the water
it's so close
you're nearly at the top a few more
flights and
whoosh the water forces its way into the
building
and drags you down at least two floors
you can barely see anything
still you know you must swim up but the
water keeps forcing you downwards
after about 30 seconds you manage to
swim your way out
and continue climbing to the top you
scramble to the top floor
and collapse on the roof you're safe for
now
the tidal wave is still going strong
plowing its way through the ravaged city
center
your phone is now waterlogged and
useless
you have a perfect 360 degree view of
your town
covered in water and debris the ground
starts to shake again
maybe you'll just sit around until this
is all over waiting for the rescue
helicopter
but then a loud explosion that almost
breaks your eardrums
shakes the ground even more often the
distance
smoke is rising and soon it covers the
entire sky
darkness hides the morning sun that's
when you can see
lava shooting up into the air and
landing nearby
the lava forms into a river flowing its
way
into town block by block with this much
seismic movement and the high intensity
of the earthquake
the world's tectonic plates have shifted
so that magma
is pushing its way to the surface from
the earth
steam begins to vent then the heat hits
you
you see the magma cover the ground like
a blanket
eating up every car in its way what's
worse is that the magma
is melting the foundations of the
buildings that manage to withstand the
earthquake and the tsunami
the buildings in the distance are now
sinking and collapsing
into the raging lava pool that's
replaced your town
one by one every building descends
that means uh oh the building where
you're standing is also swaying
it's about to fail that's when you see
the light
you look up and see a helicopter above
in the distance
you wave your arms run around jump
anything to get noticed
and it works the chopper makes a few
circles
and finally drops you a rope ladder as
you're lifted in the chopper
you take a good look at the world below
you as it wriggles around like noodles
in a strainer
you land a few miles out and are
immediately treated by a doctor
in an emergency triage center you were
one of the lucky ones
a year later the tsunami water has
receded
the lava that flowed inland has cooled
but all that magma
permanently changed the ground below it
and the whole town
is gone the disaster has thrown the
entire country
into a financial nightmare that'll last
decades
it takes months to survey the town
making sure there's no dangerous
electrical wires or busted gas pipes
anywhere
they're rebuilding your town farther
inland from where the old one was
in other towns they rebuild directly
over the ruins
in others they just decide to move
everyone to a nearby city